# Contents

- [Contents](#contents)
- [Cursors in MongoDB](#cursors-in-mongodb)
  - [Iterate a Cursor in `mongosh`](#iterate-a-cursor-in-mongosh)
    - [Manually Iterate the Cursor](#manually-iterate-the-cursor)
    - [Iterator index](#iterator-index)

# Cursors in MongoDB

Cursor is a **pointer to the result set of a query**. Clients can iterate through a cursor to retrieve results.

By default, cursors not opened within a session automatically timeout after 10 minutes of inactivity. Cursors opened under a session close with the end or timeout of the session. See Iterate a Cursor in mongosh.

## Iterate a Cursor in `mongosh`

The `db.collection.find()` method returns a cursor. To access the documents, you need to iterate the cursor. However, in `mongosh`, if the returned cursor is not assigned to a variable using the `var` keyword, then the cursor is automatically iterated up to 20 times to print up to the first 20 documents in the results.

The following examples describe ways to manually iterate the cursor to access the documents or to use the iterator index.

### Manually Iterate the Cursor

In `mongosh`, when you assign the cursor returned from the `find()` method to a variable using the `var` keyword, the cursor does not automatically iterate.

You can call the cursor variable in the shell to iterate up to 20 times and print the matching documents, as in the following example:

```
var myCursor = db.users.find( { type: 2 } );

myCursor
```

You can also use the cursor method `next()` to access the documents, as in the following example:

```
var myCursor = db.users.find( { type: 2 } );

while(myCursor.hasNext()){
    print(tojson(myCursor.next()));
}
```

As an alternative print operation, consider the `printjson()` helper method to replace `print(tojson())`:

```
var myCursor = db.users.find( { type: 2 } );
while (myCursor.hasNext()) {
   printjson(myCursor.next());
}
```

You can use the cursor method `forEach()` to iterate the cursor and access the documents, as in the following example:

```
var myCursor =  db.users.find( { type: 2 } );
myCursor.forEach(printjson);
```

### Iterator index

In `mongosh`, you can use the `toArray()` method to iterate the cursor and return the documents in an array, as in the following:

```
var myCursor = db.inventory.find( {type: 2} );
var documentArray = myCursor.toArray();
var myDocument = documentArray[3];
```

The `toArray()` method loads into RAM all documents returned by the cursor; the `toArray()` method exhausts the cursor.
