# Contents

- [Contents](#contents)
- [Projections in Mongodb](#projections-in-mongodb)
- [Projection](#projection)
- [Project Fields to Return from Query](#project-fields-to-return-from-query)
  - [Return All Fields in Matching Documents](#return-all-fields-in-matching-documents)
  - [Return the Specified Fields and the `_id` Field Only](#return-the-specified-fields-and-the-_id-field-only)
  - [Supress `_id` Field](#supress-_id-field)
  - [Return All But the Excluded Fields](#return-all-but-the-excluded-fields)
  - [Return Specific Fields in Embedded Documents](#return-specific-fields-in-embedded-documents)
  - [Supress Specific Fields in Embedded Documents](#supress-specific-fields-in-embedded-documents)
  - [Projection on Embedded Documents in an Array](#projection-on-embedded-documents-in-an-array)
  - [Project Specific Array Elements in the Returned Array](#project-specific-array-elements-in-the-returned-array)

# Projections in Mongodb

# Projection

A **Projection** in MongoDB is a document given to a query that specifies which **fields MongoDB returns** in the result set.

# Project Fields to Return from Query

By default, queries in MongoDB return all fields in matching documents. To limit the amount of data that MongoDB sends to applications, you can include a projection document to specify or restrict fields to return.

## Return All Fields in Matching Documents

If you do not specify a projection document, the `db.collection.find()` method returns all fields in the matching documents.

```
db.inventory.find( { status: "A" } )

// Corresponds to SELECT * from invetory WHERE status = "A"
```

## Return the Specified Fields and the `_id` Field Only

A projection can explicitly include several fields by setting the `<field>` to `1` in the projection document.
The following operation returns all documents that match the query. In the result set, only the `item`, `status` and, by default, the `_id` fields return in the matching documents.

```
db.inventory.find( { status: "A" }, { item: 1, status: 1 } )

// Corresponds to SELECT _id, item, status FROM inventory WHERE status = "A"
```

## Supress `_id` Field

You can remove the `_id` field from the results by setting it to `0` in the projection, as in the following example:

```
db.inventory.find( { status: "A"}, { item: 1, status: 1, _id: 0 } )

// Corresponds to SELECT item, status FROM inventory WHERE status = "A"
```

**Note :** With the exception of the `_id` field, you cannot combine **inclusion** and **exclusion** statements in projection documents.

## Return All But the Excluded Fields

Instead of listing the fields to return in the matching document, you can use a projection to exclude specific fields.
The following example which returns all fields except for the `status` and the `instock` fields in the matching documents:

```
db.inventory.find( { status: "A" }, { status: 0, instock: 0 } )
```

## Return Specific Fields in Embedded Documents

You can return specific fields in an embedded document. Use the **dot notation** to refer to the embedded field and set to `1` in the projection document.

The following example returns:

-   The `_id` field (returned by default),
-   The `item` field,
-   The `status` field,
-   The `uom` field in the `size` document.
-   The `uom` field remains embedded in the `size` document.

```
db.inventory.find(
    { status: "A" },
    { item: 1, status: 1, "size.uom": 1 }
)
```

Starting in MongoDB 4.4, you can also specify embedded fields using the nested form, e.g.

```
{ item: 1, status: 1, size: { uom: 1 } }
```

## Supress Specific Fields in Embedded Documents

You can suppress specific fields in an embedded document. Use the **dot notation** to refer to the embedded field in the projection document and set to `0`.

The following example specifies a projection to exclude the `uom` field inside the `size` document. All other fields are returned in the matching documents:

```
db.inventory.find(
    { status: "A" },
    { "size.uom": 0 }
)
```

Starting in MongoDB 4.4, you can also specify embedded fields using the nested form, e.g.

```
{ size: { uom: 0 } }
```

## Projection on Embedded Documents in an Array

Use **dot notation** to project specific fields inside documents embedded in an array.

The following example specifies a projection to return:

-   The `_id` field (returned by default),
-   The `item` field,
-   The `status` field,
-   The `qty` field in the documents embedded in the `instock` array.

```
db.inventory.find( { status: "A" }, { item: 1, status: 1, "instock.qty": 1 } )
```

## Project Specific Array Elements in the Returned Array

For fields that contain arrays, MongoDB provides the following projection operators for manipulating arrays: `$elemMatch`, `$slice`, and `$`.

The following example uses the `$slice` projection operator to return the last element in the `instock` array:

```
db.inventory.find( { status: "A" }, { item: 1, status: 1, instock: { $slice: -1 } } )
```

`$elemMatch`, `$slice`, and `$` are the only way to project specific elements to include in the returned array.
For instance, you cannot project specific array elements using the array index; e.g. `{ "instock.0": 1 }` projection will not project the array with the first element.
