# Contents

- [Contents](#contents)
- [Introduction to MongoDB Aggregation](#introduction-to-mongodb-aggregation)
  - [Aggregation Operations](#aggregation-operations)
  - [Stage](#stage)
  - [Aggregation Pipeline](#aggregation-pipeline)
    - [Structure of an Aggregation Pipeline](#structure-of-an-aggregation-pipeline)

# Introduction to MongoDB Aggregation

**Aggregation** in MongoDB is an analysis and summary of data.

## Aggregation Operations

Aggregation operations process multiple documents and return computed results. You can use aggregation operations to:

-   Group values from multiple documents together.
-   Perform operations on the grouped data to return a single result.
-   Analyze data changes over time.

To perform aggregation operations, you can use:

-   **Aggregation pipelines**, which are the preferred method for performing aggregations.
-   **Single purpose aggregation methods**, which are simple but lack the capabilities of an aggregation pipeline.

## Stage

An aggregation operation performed on the data.

## Aggregation Pipeline

A **series of stages** completed one at a time, in order.

An aggregation pipeline consists of one or more **stages** that process documents:

-   Each stage performs an operation on the input documents. For example, a stage can filter documents, group documents, and calculate values.
-   The documents that are output from a stage are passed to the next stage.
-   An aggregation pipeline can return results for groups of documents. For example, return the total, average, maximum, and minimum values.

### Structure of an Aggregation Pipeline

```
db.collection.aggregate([
    {
        $stage1: {
            { expression1 },
            { expression2 }...
        },
        $stage2: {
            { expression1 }...
        }
    }
])
```
