# MongoDB Connection Strings

## Connection String

A mongoDB connection string allows us to connect to our cluster and work with our data.
<br>
It describes a host that we we'll be using and the options for connection to a MongoDB database. For example, the connection string can be used to connect from the Mongo shell, MongoDB Compass or any other application.
There are 2 formats for connection strings provided by mongoDB:

-   **Standard format**: Used to connect to standalone clusters, replica sets, or sharded clusters.
-   **DNS seed list format**: Released in mongoDB 3.6. Alows us to provide a DNS server list to our connection string, which gives a lot more flexibility of deployment and the ability to change servers in rotation without reconfiguring clients.

### Connection String provided by Atlas

The connection string provided by atlas looks something like this:

```
mongodb+srv://<username>:<password>@cluster0.usqsf.mongodb.net/?retryWrites=true&w=majority
```

-   Begins with a required prefix `mongodb` which identifies it as a MongoDB Connection String.
-   The connection string from the atlas dashboard uses a DNS seed list entry, which has a list of hosts behind it that we can connect to.
-   The `srv` addition automatically sets the TLS security option to true and tells mongodb to use the DNS seed list.
-   `<username>` and `<password>` are the username and password created from the atlas dashboard.
-   `cluster0.usqsf.mongodb.net` is the host and the optional port number (not given here) part. If the port no. is not given (as here), mongodb defaults to port `27017`.
-   The final piece of the connection string contains any options we want to include such as the **connection timeout**, **TLS and SSL**, **connection pooling**, and **read and write concerns**.

# MongoDB Shell - mongosh

The mongoDB shell, `mongosh` is a a Node.js REPL environment. This gives us access of JavaScript variables, functions, conditionals, loops and control flow statements inside of the shell.
