# Contents

- [Contents](#contents)
- [Views](#views)
  - [Use Cases](#use-cases)
  - [Create and Manage Views](#create-and-manage-views)
  - [Comparison with On-Demand Materialized Views](#comparison-with-on-demand-materialized-views)
    - [Indexes](#indexes)
    - [Performance](#performance)

# Views

A MongoDB view is a **read-only queryable object** whose contents are defined by an [aggregation pipeline](../5.%20MongoDB%20Aggregation/5.1%20Introductiion%20to%20Aggregation.md) on other collections or views.

MongoDB does not persist the view contents to disk. A view's content is computed on-demand when a client queries the view.

**Note :** Please go through basic [aggregation pipelines](../5.%20MongoDB%20Aggregation/5.1%20Introductiion%20to%20Aggregation.md) before studying Views in detail.

## Use Cases

You can use views to:

-   Create a view on a collection of employee data to exclude any personally identifiable information (PII). Your application can query the view for employee data that does not contain any PII.
-   Create a view on a collection of sensor data to add computed fields and metrics. Your application can use find operations to query the computed data.
-   Create a view that joins two collections containing inventory and order history. Your application can query the view without managing or understanding the underlying pipeline.

## Create and Manage Views

To learn how to create and manage views, see the following pages:

-   Create and Query a View
-   Use a View to Join Two Collections
-   Create a View with Default Collation
-   Modify a View
-   Remove a View

## Comparison with On-Demand Materialized Views

MongoDB provides two different view types: **standard views** and **on-demand materialized views**.
Both view types return the results from an aggregation pipeline.

-   **Standard views** are computed when you read the view, and are not stored to disk.
-   **On-demand materialized views** are stored on and read from disk. They use a `$merge` or `$out` stage to update the saved data.

### Indexes

Standard views use the indexes of the underlying collection. As a result, you cannot create, drop or re-build indexes on a standard view directly, nor get a list of indexes on the view.

You can create indexes directly on on-demand materialized views because they are stored on disk.

### Performance

**On-demand materialized views provide better read performance** than standard views because they are read from disk instead of computed as part of the query. This performance benefit increases based on the complexity of the pipeline and size of the data being aggregated.
