# Contents

- [Contents](#contents)
- [Unique Indexes](#unique-indexes)
  - [Create a Unique Index](#create-a-unique-index)
  - [Unique Index on a Single Field](#unique-index-on-a-single-field)
  - [Unique Compound Index](#unique-compound-index)
  - [Unique Index and Missing Field](#unique-index-and-missing-field)
- [Partial Indexes](#partial-indexes)
  - [Create a Partial Index](#create-a-partial-index)
  - [Behaviour](#behaviour)
    - [Query Coverage](#query-coverage)
    - [Comparison with Sparse Indexes](#comparison-with-sparse-indexes)
  - [Examples](#examples)
    - [Create a Partial Index On A Collection](#create-a-partial-index-on-a-collection)
    - [Partial Index with Unique Constraint](#partial-index-with-unique-constraint)
- [Sparse indexes](#sparse-indexes)
  - [Create a Sparse Index](#create-a-sparse-index)
  - [Behaviour](#behaviour-1)
    - [sparse Index and Incomplete Results](#sparse-index-and-incomplete-results)
    - [sparse Compound Indexes](#sparse-compound-indexes)
    - [sparse and unique Properties](#sparse-and-unique-properties)
  - [Examples](#examples-1)
    - [Create a Sparse Index On A Collection](#create-a-sparse-index-on-a-collection)
    - [Sparse Index On A Collection Cannot Return Complete Results](#sparse-index-on-a-collection-cannot-return-complete-results)
- [TTL Indexes](#ttl-indexes)
  - [Create a TTL Index](#create-a-ttl-index)
  - [Convert a non-TTL single-field Index into a TTL Index](#convert-a-non-ttl-single-field-index-into-a-ttl-index)
  - [Change the `expireAfterSeconds` value for a TTL Index](#change-the-expireafterseconds-value-for-a-ttl-index)
  - [Behavior](#behavior)
    - [Expiration of Data](#expiration-of-data)
    - [Delete Operations](#delete-operations)
      - [Timing of the Delete Operation](#timing-of-the-delete-operation)
  - [Restrictions](#restrictions)

# Unique Indexes

A unique index ensures that the indexed fields do not store duplicate values; i.e. enforces uniqueness for the indexed fields. By default, MongoDB creates a unique index on the `_id` field during the creation of a collection.

## Create a Unique Index

To create a unique index, use the `db.collection.createIndex()` method with the unique option set to `true`.

```
db.collection.createIndex(<key and index type specification>, { unique: true })
```

## Unique Index on a Single Field

For example, to create a unique index on the `user_id` field of the members collection, use the following operation in **mongosh**:

```
db.members.createIndex( { "user_id": 1 }, { unique: true } )
```

## Unique Compound Index

You can also enforce a unique constraint on compound indexes. If you use the unique constraint on a compound index, then MongoDB will enforce **uniqueness on the combination of the index key values**.

For example, to create a unique index on `groupNumber`, `lastname`, and `firstname` fields of the `members` collection, use the following operation in **mongosh**:

```
db.members.createIndex( { groupNumber: 1, lastname: 1, firstname: 1 }, { unique: true } )
```

The created index enforces uniqueness for the combination of `groupNumber`, `lastname`, and `firstname` values.

For another example, consider a collection with the following document:

```
{ _id: 1, a: [ { loc: "A", qty: 5 }, { qty: 10 } ] }
```

Create a unique compound multikey index on `a.loc` and `a.qty`:

```
db.collection.createIndex( { "a.loc": 1, "a.qty": 1 }, { unique: true } )
```

The unique index permits the insertion of the following documents into the collection since the index enforces uniqueness for the combination of `a.loc` and `a.qty` values:

```
db.collection.insertMany( [
   { _id: 2, a: [ { loc: "A" }, { qty: 5 } ] },
   { _id: 3, a: [ { loc: "A", qty: 10 } ] }
] )
```

## Unique Index and Missing Field

If a document does not have a value for the indexed field in a unique index, the index will store a null value for this document. Because of the unique constraint, MongoDB will only permit one document that lacks the indexed field. If there is more than one document without a value for the indexed field or is missing the indexed field, the index build will fail with a duplicate key error.

For example, a collection has a unique index on `x`:

```
db.collection.createIndex( { "x": 1 }, { unique: true } )
```

The unique index allows the insertion of a document without the field `x` if the collection does not already contain a document missing the field `x`:

```
db.collection.insertOne( { y: 1 } )
```

However, the unique index errors on the insertion of a document without the field `x` if the collection already contains a document missing the field `x`:

```
db.collection.insertOne( { z: 1 } )
```

The operation fails to insert the document because of the violation of the unique constraint on the value of the field `x`:

```
WriteResult({
   "nInserted" : 0,
   "writeError" : {
      "code" : 11000,
      "errmsg" : "E11000 duplicate key error index: test.collection.$a.b_1 dup key: { : null }"
   }
})
```

# Partial Indexes

**Partial indexes** only index the documents in a collection that meet a specified filter expression. By indexing a subset of the documents in a collection, partial indexes have lower storage requirements and reduced performance costs for index creation and maintenance.

## Create a Partial Index

To create a partial index, use the `db.collection.createIndex()` method with the `partialFilterExpression` option. The `partialFilterExpression` option accepts a document that specifies the filter condition using:

-   equality expressions (i.e. field: value or using the `$eq` operator),
-   `$exists`: true expression,
-   `$gt, $gte, $lt, $lte` expressions,
-   `$type` expressions,
-   `$and` operator,
-   `$or` operator,
-   `$in` operator

For example, the following operation creates a compound index that indexes only the documents with a rating field greater than `5`.

```
db.restaurants.createIndex(
   { cuisine: 1, name: 1 },
   { partialFilterExpression: { rating: { $gt: 5 } } }
)
```

You can specify a `partialFilterExpression` option for all MongoDB **index types**.

## Behaviour

### Query Coverage

MongoDB will not use the partial index for a query or sort operation if using the index results in an incomplete result set.

To use the partial index, a query must contain the filter expression (or a modified filter expression that specifies a subset of the filter expression) as part of its query condition.

For example, given the following index:

```
db.restaurants.createIndex(
   { cuisine: 1 },
   { partialFilterExpression: { rating: { $gt: 5 } } }
)
```

The following query can use the index since the query predicate includes the condition rating: `{ $gte: 8 }` that matches a subset of documents matched by the index filter expression rating: `{ $gt: 5 }`:

```
db.restaurants.find( { cuisine: "Italian", rating: { $gte: 8 } } )
```

However, the following query cannot use the partial index on the cuisine field because using the index results in an incomplete result set. Specifically, the query predicate includes the condition rating: `{ $lt: 8 }` while the index has the filter rating: `{ $gt: 5 }`. That is, the query `{ cuisine: "Italian", rating: { $lt: 8 } }` matches more documents (e.g. an Italian restaurant with a rating equal to 1) than are indexed.

```
db.restaurants.find( { cuisine: "Italian", rating: { $lt: 8 } } )
```

Similarly, the following query cannot use the partial index because the query predicate does not include the filter expression and using the index would return an incomplete result set.

```
db.restaurants.find( { cuisine: "Italian" } )
```

### Comparison with Sparse Indexes

Partial indexes should be preferred over sparse indexes. Partial indexes provide the following benefits:

-   Greater control over which documents are indexed.
-   A superset of the functionality offered by sparse indexes.

Sparse indexes select documents to index solely based on the existence of the indexed field, or for compound indexes, the existence of the indexed fields.

Partial indexes determine the index entries based on the specified filter. The filter can include fields other than the index keys and can specify conditions other than just an existence check.
For example, **a partial index can implement the same behavior as a sparse index:**

```
db.contacts.createIndex(
   { name: 1 },
   { partialFilterExpression: { name: { $exists: true } } }
)
```

This partial index supports the same queries as a sparse index on the `name` field.

However, a partial index can also specify filter expressions on fields other than the index key. For example, the following operation creates a partial index, where the index is on the `name` field but the filter expression is on the `email` field:

```
db.contacts.createIndex(
   { name: 1 },
   { partialFilterExpression: { email: { $exists: true } } }
)
```

For the query optimizer to choose this partial index, the query predicate must include a condition on the `name` field as well as a non-null match on the `email` field.

For example, the following query can use the index because it includes both a condition on the `name` field and a non-null match on the `email` field:

```
db.contacts.find( { name: "xyz", email: { $regex: /\.org$/ } } )
```

However, the following query cannot use the index because it includes a null match on the `email` field, which is not permitted by the filter expression `{ email: { $exists: true } }`:

```
db.contacts.find( { name: "xyz", email: { $exists: false } } )
```

## Examples

### Create a Partial Index On A Collection

Consider a collection `restaurants` containing documents that resemble the following:

```
{
   "_id" : ObjectId("5641f6a7522545bc535b5dc9"),
   "address" : {
      "building" : "1007",
      "coord" : [
         -73.856077,
         40.848447
      ],
      "street" : "Morris Park Ave",
      "zipcode" : "10462"
   },
   "borough" : "Bronx",
   "cuisine" : "Bakery",
   "rating" : { "date" : ISODate("2014-03-03T00:00:00Z"),
                "grade" : "A",
                "score" : 2
              },
   "name" : "Morris Park Bake Shop",
   "restaurant_id" : "30075445"
}
```

You could add a partial index on the `borough` and `cuisine` fields choosing only to index documents where the `rating.grade` field is `A`:

```
db.restaurants.createIndex(
   { borough: 1, cuisine: 1 },
   { partialFilterExpression: { 'rating.grade': { $eq: "A" } } }
)
```

Then, the following query on the `restaurants` collection uses the partial index to return the restaurants in the `Bronx` with rating.grade equal to `A`:

```
db.restaurants.find( { borough: "Bronx", 'rating.grade': "A" } )
```

However, the following query cannot use the partial index because the query expression does not include the `rating.grade` field:

```
db.restaurants.find( { borough: "Bronx", cuisine: "Bakery" } )
```

### Partial Index with Unique Constraint

Partial indexes only index the documents in a collection that meet a specified filter expression. If you specify both the `partialFilterExpression` and a `unique` constraint, the unique constraint only applies to the documents that meet the filter expression. A partial index with a unique constraint does not prevent the insertion of documents that do not meet the unique constraint if the documents do not meet the filter criteria.

For example, a collection users contains the following documents:

```
{ "_id" : ObjectId("56424f1efa0358a27fa1f99a"), "username" : "david", "age" : 29 }
{ "_id" : ObjectId("56424f37fa0358a27fa1f99b"), "username" : "amanda", "age" : 35 }
{ "_id" : ObjectId("56424fe2fa0358a27fa1f99c"), "username" : "rajiv", "age" : 57 }
```

The following operation creates an index that specifies a unique constraint on the `username` field and a partial filter expression `age: { $gte: 21 }`.

```
db.users.createIndex(
   { username: 1 },
   { unique: true, partialFilterExpression: { age: { $gte: 21 } } }
)
```

The index prevents the insertion of the following documents since documents already exist with the specified usernames and the age fields are greater than 21:

```
db.users.insertMany( [
   { username: "david", age: 27 },
   { username: "amanda", age: 25 },
   { username: "rajiv", age: 32 }
] )
```

However, the following documents with duplicate usernames are allowed since the unique constraint only applies to documents with age greater than or equal to 21.

```
db.users.insertMany( [
   { username: "david", age: 20 },
   { username: "amanda" },
   { username: "rajiv", age: null }
] )
```

# Sparse indexes

Sparse indexes only contain entries for documents that have the indexed field, even if the index field contains a null value. The index skips over any document that is missing the indexed field. The index is "sparse" because it does not include all documents of a collection. By contrast, non-sparse indexes contain all documents in a collection, storing null values for those documents that do not contain the indexed field.

**IMPORTANT**

MongoDB provides the option to create **[partial indexes](#partial-indexes)**. Partial indexes offer a superset of the functionality of sparse indexes. Partial Indexes should be preferred over sparse indexes.

## Create a Sparse Index

To create a sparse index, use the `db.collection.createIndex()` method with the `sparse` option set to `true`. For example, the following operation in **mongosh** creates a sparse index on the `xmpp_id` field of the `addresses` collection:

```
db.addresses.createIndex( { "xmpp_id": 1 }, { sparse: true } )
```

The index does not index documents that do not include the `xmpp_id` field.

## Behaviour

### sparse Index and Incomplete Results

If a sparse index would result in an incomplete result set for queries and sort operations, MongoDB will not use that index unless a `hint()` explicitly specifies the index.

For example, the query `{ x: { $exists: false } }` will not use a sparse index on the `x` field unless explicitly hinted.

If you include a `hint()` that specifies a sparse index when you perform a `count()` of all documents in a collection (i.e. with an empty query predicate), the sparse index is used even if the sparse index results in an incorrect count.

```
db.collection.insertOne( { _id: 1, y: 1 } );
db.collection.createIndex( { x: 1 }, { sparse: true } );
db.collection.find().hint( { x: 1 } ).count();
```

To obtain the correct count, do not `hint()` with a sparse index when performing a count of all documents in a collection.

```
db.collection.find().count();
db.collection.createIndex( { y: 1 } );
db.collection.find().hint( { y: 1 } ).count();
```

### sparse Compound Indexes

Sparse compound indexes that only contain ascending/descending index keys will index a document as long as the document contains at least one of the keys.

For sparse compound indexes that contain a geospatial key (i.e. 2dsphere, 2d, or geoHaystack index keys) along with ascending/descending index key(s), only the existence of the geospatial field(s) in a document determine whether the index references the document.

For sparse compound indexes that contain text index keys along with ascending/descending index keys, only the existence of the text index field(s) determine whether the index references a document.

### sparse and unique Properties

An index that is **both sparse and unique** prevents collection from having documents with duplicate values for a field but **allows multiple documents that omit the key**.

## Examples

### Create a Sparse Index On A Collection

Consider a collection `scores` that contains the following documents:

```
{ "_id" : ObjectId("523b6e32fb408eea0eec2647"), "userid" : "newbie" }
{ "_id" : ObjectId("523b6e61fb408eea0eec2648"), "userid" : "abby", "score" : 82 }
{ "_id" : ObjectId("523b6e6ffb408eea0eec2649"), "userid" : "nina", "score" : 90 }
```

The collection has a sparse index on the field `score`:

```
db.scores.createIndex( { score: 1 } , { sparse: true } )
```

Then, the following query on the `scores` collection uses the sparse index to return the documents that have the `score` field less than (`$lt`) `90`:

```
db.scores.find( { score: { $lt: 90 } } )
```

Because the document for the userid `"newbie"` does not contain the score `field` and thus does not meet the query criteria, the query can use the sparse index to return the results:

```
{ "_id" : ObjectId("523b6e61fb408eea0eec2648"), "userid" : "abby", "score" : 82 }
```

### Sparse Index On A Collection Cannot Return Complete Results

Consider a collection `scores` that contains the following documents:

```
{ "_id" : ObjectId("523b6e32fb408eea0eec2647"), "userid" : "newbie" }
{ "_id" : ObjectId("523b6e61fb408eea0eec2648"), "userid" : "abby", "score" : 82 }
{ "_id" : ObjectId("523b6e6ffb408eea0eec2649"), "userid" : "nina", "score" : 90 }
```

The collection has a sparse index on the field `score`:

```
db.scores.createIndex( { score: 1 } , { sparse: true } )
```

Because the document for the userid `"newbie"` does not contain the `score` field, the sparse index does not contain an entry for that document.

Consider the following query to return all documents in the `scores` collection, sorted by the `score` field:

```
db.scores.find().sort( { score: -1 } )
```

Even though the sort is by the indexed field, MongoDB will not select the sparse index to fulfill the query in order to return complete results:

```
{ "_id" : ObjectId("523b6e6ffb408eea0eec2649"), "userid" : "nina", "score" : 90 }
{ "_id" : ObjectId("523b6e61fb408eea0eec2648"), "userid" : "abby", "score" : 82 }
{ "_id" : ObjectId("523b6e32fb408eea0eec2647"), "userid" : "newbie" }
```

To use the sparse index, explicitly specify the index with `hint()`:

```
db.scores.find().sort( { score: -1 } ).hint( { score: 1 } )
```

The use of the index results in the return of only those documents with the score field:

```
{ "_id" : ObjectId("523b6e6ffb408eea0eec2649"), "userid" : "nina", "score" : 90 }
{ "_id" : ObjectId("523b6e61fb408eea0eec2648"), "userid" : "abby", "score" : 82 }
```

# TTL Indexes

**TTL indexes** are special single-field indexes that MongoDB can use to automatically remove documents from a collection after a certain amount of time or at a specific clock time. Data expiration is useful for certain types of information like machine generated event data, logs, and session information that only need to persist in a database for a finite amount of time.

## Create a TTL Index

To create a TTL index, use the `createIndex()` method on a field whose value is either a **date** or an **array that contains date values**, and specify the `expireAfterSeconds` option with the desired TTL value in seconds.

For example, to create a TTL index on the `lastModifiedDate` field of the eventlog collection, with a TTL value of `3600` seconds, use the following operation in `mongosh`:

```
db.eventlog.createIndex( { "lastModifiedDate": 1 }, { expireAfterSeconds: 3600 } )
```

## Convert a non-TTL single-field Index into a TTL Index

Starting in MongoDB 5.1, you can add the `expireAfterSeconds` option to an existing single-field index. To change a non-TTL single-field index to a TTL index, use the `collMod` database command:

```
db.runCommand({
  "collMod": <collName>,
  "index": {
    "keyPattern": <keyPattern>,
    "expireAfterSeconds": <number>
  }
})
```

The following example converts a non-TTL single-field index with the pattern `{ "lastModifiedDate": 1 }` into a TTL index:

```
db.runCommand({
  "collMod": "tickets",
  "index": {
    "keyPattern": { "lastModifiedDate": 1 },
    "expireAfterSeconds": 100
  }
})
```

## Change the `expireAfterSeconds` value for a TTL Index

To change the `expireAfterSeconds` value for a TTL Index, use the `collMod` database command:

```
db.runCommand({
  "collMod": <collName>,
  "index": {
    "keyPattern": <keyPattern>,
    "expireAfterSeconds": <number>
  }
})
```

The following example changes the `expireAfterSeconds` value for an index with the pattern `{ "lastModifiedDate": 1 }` on the `tickets` collection:

```
db.runCommand({
  "collMod": "tickets",
  "index": {
    "keyPattern": { "lastModifiedDate": 1 },
    "expireAfterSeconds": 100
  }
})
```

## Behavior

### Expiration of Data

TTL indexes expire documents after the specified number of seconds has passed since the indexed field value; i.e. the expiration threshold is the indexed field value plus the specified number of seconds.

If the field is an array, and there are multiple date values in the index, MongoDB uses **lowest (i.e. earliest) date value in the array** to calculate the expiration threshold.

If the indexed field in a document is not a date or an array that holds one or more date values, the **document will not expire**.

If a document does not contain the indexed field, the document will not expire.

### Delete Operations

A background thread in `mongod` reads the values in the index and removes expired documents from the collection.

When the TTL thread is active, you will see delete operations in the output of `db.currentOp()` or in the data collected by the **database profiler**.

#### Timing of the Delete Operation

MongoDB begins removing expired documents as soon as the index finishes building on the **primary**.

The TTL index does not guarantee that expired data will be deleted immediately upon expiration. There may be a delay between the time that a document expires and the time that MongoDB removes the document from the database.

The background task that removes expired documents **runs every 60 seconds**. As a result, documents may remain in a collection during the period between the expiration of the document and the running of the background task. MongoDB starts deleting documents `0` to `60` seconds after the index completes.

Because the duration of the removal operation depends on the workload of your `mongod` instance, expired data may exist for some time beyond the `60` second period between runs of the background task.

## Restrictions

-   TTL indexes are single-field indexes. Compound indexes do not support TTL and ignore the `expireAfterSeconds` option.
-   The `_id` field does not support TTL indexes.
-   You cannot create a TTL index on a **capped collection** because MongoDB cannot remove documents from a capped collection.
-   You cannot create a TTL index on a **time series collection**. Similar functionality is provided through automatic removal on time series collections instead.
-   You cannot use `createIndex()` to change the value of `expireAfterSeconds` of an existing index. Instead use the `collMod` database command.
-   If a non-TTL single-field index already exists for a field, you cannot create a TTL index on the same field since you cannot create indexes that have the same key specification and differ only by the options. To change a non-TTL single-field index to a TTL index, use the `collMod` database command.
