# Contents

- [Contents](#contents)
- [Indexing Strategies](#indexing-strategies)
- [The ESR (Equality, Sort, Range) Rule](#the-esr-equality-sort-range-rule)
  - [Equality](#equality)
  - [Sort](#sort)
  - [Range](#range)
  - [Additional Considerations](#additional-considerations)
  - [Example](#example)
- [Create Indexes to Support Your Queries](#create-indexes-to-support-your-queries)
  - [Create a Single-Key Index if All Queries Use the Same, Single Key](#create-a-single-key-index-if-all-queries-use-the-same-single-key)
  - [Create Compound Indexes to Support Several Different Queries](#create-compound-indexes-to-support-several-different-queries)
  - [Index Use and Collation](#index-use-and-collation)
- [Use Indexes to Sort Query Results](#use-indexes-to-sort-query-results)
  - [Note](#note)
  - [Sort with a Single Field Index](#sort-with-a-single-field-index)
  - [Sort on Multiple Fields](#sort-on-multiple-fields)
  - [Sort and Index Prefix](#sort-and-index-prefix)
  - [Sort and Non-prefix Subset of an Index](#sort-and-non-prefix-subset-of-an-index)
  - [Index Sort Order](#index-sort-order)
  - [Examples](#examples)
- [Ensure Indexes Fit in RAM](#ensure-indexes-fit-in-ram)
  - [Indexes that Hold Only Recent Values in RAM](#indexes-that-hold-only-recent-values-in-ram)

# Indexing Strategies

The best indexes for your application must take a number of factors into account, including the kinds of queries you expect, the ratio of reads to writes, and the amount of free memory on your system.

When developing your indexing strategy you should have a deep understanding of your application's queries. Before you build indexes, map out the types of queries you will run so that you can build indexes that reference those fields. Indexes come with a performance cost, but are more than worth the cost for frequent queries on large data sets. Consider the relative frequency of each query in the application and whether the query justifies an index.

The best overall strategy for designing indexes is to profile a variety of index configurations with data sets similar to the ones you'll be running in production to see which configurations perform best. Inspect the current indexes created for your collections to ensure they are supporting your current and planned queries. If an index is no longer used, drop the index.

Generally, MongoDB only uses one index to fulfill most queries. However, each clause of an $or query may use a different index, and in addition, MongoDB can use an intersection of multiple indexes.

The following sections introduce indexing strategies:

-   **[Use the ESR (Equality, Sort, Range) Rule](#)**
    **The ESR (Equality, Sort, Range) Rule** is a guide to creating indexes that support your queries efficiently.
-   **[Create Indexes to Support Your Queries](#)**
    An index supports a query when the index contains all the fields scanned by the query. Creating indexes that support queries results in greatly increased query performance.
-   **[Use Indexes to Sort Query Results](#)**
    To support efficient queries, use the strategies here when you specify the sequential order and sort order of index fields.
-   **[Ensure Indexes Fit in RAM](#)**
    When your index fits in RAM, the system can avoid reading the index from disk and you get the fastest processing.
-   **[Create Queries that Ensure Selectivity](#)**
    **Selectivity** is the ability of a query to narrow results using the index. Selectivity allows MongoDB to use the index for a larger portion of the work associated with fulfilling the query.

# The ESR (Equality, Sort, Range) Rule

An index that references multiple fields is a **compound index**. **Compound indexes** can dramatically improve query response times.

Index keys correspond to document fields. In most cases, applying the **ESR (Equality, Sort, Range) Rule** to arrange the index keys helps to create a more efficient compound index.

## Equality

**"Equality"** refers to an exact match on a single value. The following exact match queries scan the `cars` collection for documents whose `model` field exactly matches `Cordoba`.

```
db.cars.find( { model: "Cordoba" } )
db.cars.find( { model: { $eq: "Cordoba" } } )
```

Index searches make efficient use of exact matches to limit the number of documents that need to be examined to satisfy a query. Place fields that require exact matches first in your index.

An index may have multiple keys for queries with exact matches. The index keys for equality matches can appear in any order. However, to satisfy an equality match with the index, all of the index keys for exact matches must come before any other index fields. MongoDB's search algorithm eliminates any need to arrange the exact match fields in a particular order.

Exact matches should be selective. To reduce the number of index keys scanned, ensure equality tests eliminate at least 90% of possible document matches.

## Sort

**"Sort"** determines the order for results. Sort follows equality matches because the equality matches reduce the number of documents that need to be sorted. Sorting after the equality matches also allows MongoDB to do a non-blocking sort.

An index can support sort operations when the query fields are a subset of the index keys. Sort operations on a subset of the index keys are only supported if the query includes equality conditions for all of the prefix keys that precede the sort keys. For more information see: Sort and Non-prefix Subset of an Index.

The following example queries the `cars` collection. The output is sorted by `model`:

```
db.cars.find( { manufacturer: "GM" } ).sort( { model: 1 } )
```

To improve query performance, create an index on the `manufacturer` and `model` fields:

```
db.cars.createIndex( { manufacturer: 1, model: 1 } )
```

`manufacturer` is the first key because it is an equality match.

`model` is indexed in the same order ( `1` ) as the query.

## Range

**"Range"** filters scan fields. The scan doesn't require an exact match, which means range filters are loosely bound to index keys. To improve query efficiency, make the range bounds as tight as possible and use equality matches to limit the number of documents that must be scanned.

Range filters resemble the following:

```
db.cars.find( { price: { $gte: 15000} } )
db.cars.find( { age: { $lt: 10 } } )
db.cars.find( { priorAccidents: { $ne: null } } )
```

MongoDB cannot do an index sort on the results of a range filter. Place the range filter after the sort predicate so MongoDB can use a non-blocking index sort.

## Additional Considerations

Inequality operators such as `$ne` or `$nin` are range operators, not equality operators.

`$regex` is a range operator.

`$in` can be an **equality operator** or a **range operator**. When `$in` is used alone, it is an equality operator that does a series of equality matches. `$in` acts like a range operator when it is used with `.sort()`.

## Example

The following query searches the `cars` collection for vehicles manufactured by `Ford` that cost more than `$15,000` dollars. The results are sorted by `model`:

```
db.cars.find(
   {
       manufacturer: 'Ford',
       cost: { $gt: 10000 }
   } ).sort( { model: 1 } )
```

The query contains all the elements of the **ESR Rule**:

-   `manufacturer`: `'Ford'` is an equality based match
-   `cost`: `{ $gt: 10000 }` is a range based match, and
-   `model` is used for sorting

Following the ESR rule, the optimal index for the example query is:

```
{ manufacturer: 1, model: 1, cost: 1 }
```

# Create Indexes to Support Your Queries

An index supports a query when the index contains all the fields scanned by the query. The query scans the index and not the collection. Creating indexes that support queries results in greatly increased query performance.

This section describes strategies for creating indexes that support queries.

## Create a Single-Key Index if All Queries Use the Same, Single Key

If you only ever query on a single key in a given collection, then you need to create just one single-key index for that collection. For example, you might create an index on `category` in the `product` collection:

```
db.products.createIndex( { "category": 1 } )
```

## Create Compound Indexes to Support Several Different Queries

If you sometimes query on only one key and at other times query on that key combined with a second key, then creating a compound index is more efficient than creating a single-key index. MongoDB will use the compound index for both queries. For example, you might create an index on both `category` and `item`.

```
db.products.createIndex( { "category": 1, "item": 1 } )
```

This allows you both options. You can query on just category, and you also can query on category combined with item. A single compound index on multiple fields can support all the queries that search a "**prefix**" subset of those fields.

Starting in version 2.6, MongoDB can use index intersection to fulfill queries. The choice between creating compound indexes that support your queries or relying on index intersection depends on the specifics of your system. See [Index Intersection](./7.5%20Index%20Intersection.md) and Compound Indexes for more details.

## Index Use and Collation

To use an index for string comparisons, an operation must also specify the same **collation**. That is, an index with a collation cannot support an operation that performs string comparisons on the indexed fields if the operation specifies a different collation.

For example, the collection `myColl` has an index on a string field category with the collation locale "**fr**".

```
db.myColl.createIndex( { category: 1 }, { collation: { locale: "fr" } } )
```

The following query operation, which specifies the same collation as the index, can use the index:

```
db.myColl.find( { category: "cafe" } ).collation( { locale: "fr" } )
```

However, the following query operation, which by default uses the "**simple**" binary collator, cannot use the index:

```
db.myColl.find( { category: "cafe" } )
```

For a compound index where the index prefix keys are not strings, arrays, and embedded documents, an operation that specifies a different collation can still use the index to support comparisons on the index prefix keys.

For example, the collection `myColl` has a compound index on the numeric fields `score` and `price` and the string field `category`; the index is created with the collation locale "**fr**" for string comparisons:

```
db.myColl.createIndex(
   { score: 1, price: 1, category: 1 },
   { collation: { locale: "fr" } } )
```

The following operations, which use "**simple**" binary collation for string comparisons, can use the index:

```
db.myColl.find( { score: 5 } ).sort( { price: 1 } )
db.myColl.find( { score: 5, price: { $gt: NumberDecimal( "10" ) } } ).sort( { price: 1 } )
```

The following operation, which uses "**simple**" binary collation for string comparisons on the indexed category field, can use the index to fulfill only the `score: 5` portion of the query:

```
db.myColl.find( { score: 5, category: "cafe" } )
```

# Use Indexes to Sort Query Results

Since indexes contain ordered records, MongoDB can obtain the results of a sort from an index that includes the sort fields. MongoDB may use multiple indexes to support a sort operation if the sort uses the same indexes as the query predicate.

If MongoDB cannot use an index or indexes to obtain the sort order, MongoDB must perform a blocking sort operation on the data. A blocking sort indicates that MongoDB must consume and process all input documents to the sort before returning results. Blocking sorts do not block concurrent operations on the collection or database.

If MongoDB needs more than `100` megabytes of system memory for the blocking sort operation, MongoDB returns an error unless the query specifies `cursor.allowDiskUse()` (New in MongoDB 4.4). `allowDiskUse()` allows MongoDB to use temporary files on disk to store data exceeding the `100` megabyte system memory limit while processing a blocking sort operation.

Sort operations that use an index often have better performance than blocking sorts.

## Note

As a result of changes to sorting behavior on array fields in MongoDB 4.4, when you sort on an array indexed with a **multikey** index, the query plan includes a blocking sort stage, unless:

-   The index boundaries for all sort fields are `[MinKey, MaxKey]`, and
-   No boundaries for any multikey-indexed field have the same path prefix as the sort pattern.

## Sort with a Single Field Index

If an ascending or a descending index is on a single field, the sort operation on the field can be in either direction.

For example, create an ascending index on the field `a` for a collection `records`:

```
db.records.createIndex( { a: 1 } )
```

This index can support an ascending sort on `a`:

```
db.records.find().sort( { a: 1 } )
```

The index can also support the following descending sort on `a` by traversing the index in reverse order:

```
db.records.find().sort( { a: -1 } )
```

## Sort on Multiple Fields

Create a compound index to support sorting on multiple fields.

You can specify a sort on all the keys of the index or on a subset; however, the sort keys must be listed in the same order as they appear in the index. For example, an index key pattern `{ a: 1, b: 1 }` can support a sort on `{ a: 1, b: 1 }` but not on `{ b: 1, a: 1 }`.

For a query to use a compound index for a sort, the specified sort direction for all keys in the `cursor.sort()` document must match the index key pattern or match the inverse of the index key pattern. For example, an index key pattern `{ a: 1, b: -1 }` can support a sort on `{ a: 1, b: -1 }` and `{ a: -1, b: 1 }` but not on `{ a: -1, b: -1 }` or `{a: 1, b: 1}`.

## Sort and Index Prefix

If the sort keys correspond to the index keys or an index prefix, MongoDB can use the index to sort the query results. A prefix of a compound index is a subset that consists of one or more keys at the start of the index key pattern.

For example, create a compound index on the `data` collection:

```
db.data.createIndex( { a:1, b: 1, c: 1, d: 1 } )
```

Then, the following are prefixes for that index:

```
{ a: 1 }
{ a: 1, b: 1 }
{ a: 1, b: 1, c: 1 }
```

The following query and sort operations use the index prefixes to sort the results. These operations do not need to sort the result set in memory.

| Example                                                    | Index Prefix           |
| ---------------------------------------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| `db.data.find().sort( { a: 1 } )`                          | `{ a: 1 }`             |
| `db.data.find().sort( { a: -1 } )`                         | `{ a: 1 }`             |
| `db.data.find().sort( { a: 1, b: 1 } )`                    | `{ a: 1, b: 1 }`       |
| `db.data.find().sort( { a: -1, b: -1 } )`                  | `{ a: 1, b: 1 }`       |
| `db.data.find().sort( { a: 1, b: 1, c: 1 } )`              | `{ a: 1, b: 1, c: 1 }` |
| `db.data.find( { a: { $gt: 4 } } ).sort( { a: 1, b: 1 } )` | `{ a: 1, b: 1 }`       |

Consider the following example in which the prefix keys of the index appear in both the query predicate and the sort:

```
db.data.find( { a: { $gt: 4 } } ).sort( { a: 1, b: 1 } )
```

In such cases, MongoDB can use the index to retrieve the documents in order specified by the sort. As the example shows, the index prefix in the query predicate can be different from the prefix in the sort.

## Sort and Non-prefix Subset of an Index

An index can support sort operations on a non-prefix subset of the index key pattern. To do so, the query **must include equality conditions on all the prefix keys that precede the sort keys**.

For example, the collection data has the following index:

```
{ a: 1, b: 1, c: 1, d: 1 }
```

The following operations can use the index to get the sort order:

| Example                                                   | Index Prefix            |
| --------------------------------------------------------- | ----------------------- |
| `db.data.find( { a: 5 } ).sort( { b: 1, c: 1 } )`         | `{ a: 1 , b: 1, c: 1 }` |
| `db.data.find( { b: 3, a: 4 } ).sort( { c: 1 } )`         | `{ a: 1, b: 1, c: 1 }`  |
| `db.data.find( { a: 5, b: { $lt: 3} } ).sort( { b: 1 } )` | `{ a: 1, b: 1 }`        |

As the last operation shows, only the index fields preceding the sort subset must have the equality conditions in the query document; the other index fields may specify other conditions.

If the query does not specify an equality condition on an index prefix that precedes or overlaps with the sort specification, the operation will not efficiently use the index. For example, the following operations specify a sort document of `{ c: 1 }`, but the query documents do not contain equality matches on the preceding index fields `a` and `b`:

```
db.data.find( { a: { $gt: 2 } } ).sort( { c: 1 } )
db.data.find( { c: 5 } ).sort( { c: 1 } )
```

These operations will not efficiently use the index `{ a: 1, b: 1, c: 1, d: 1 }` and may not even use the index to retrieve the documents.

## Index Sort Order

A collection of indexed documents may have multiple data types in the key field.

When an index has a key with multiple data types, the index is sorted according to the **BSON type sort order**.

In array comparisons:

-   A less-than comparison, or an ascending sort, compares the smallest elements of the array according to the **BSON type sort order**.
-   A greater-than comparison, or a descending sort, compares the largest elements of the array according to the **reverse BSON type sort order**.
-   When comparing a field whose value is a one element array (example, `[ 1 ]`) with non-array fields (example, `2`), the comparison is for `1` and `2`.
-   A comparison of an empty array (example, `[ ]`) considers the empty array as less than a `null` value or a missing field value.

## Examples

The following example demonstrates sorting when index keys have the same or different types.

Create the `keyTypes` collection:

```
db.keyTypes.insertMany( [
  { seqNum: 1, seqType: null, type: "null" },
  { seqNum: 29, seqType: null, type: "null" },
  { seqNum: 2, seqType: Int32("10"), type: "Int32"  },
  { seqNum: 28, seqType: Int32("10"), type: "Int32"  },
  { seqNum: 3, seqType: Long("10"), type: "Long" },
  { seqNum: 27, seqType: Long("10"), type: "Long" },
  { seqNum: 4, seqType: Decimal128("10"), type: "Decimal128" },
  { seqNum: 26, seqType: Decimal128("10"), type: "Decimal128" },
  { seqNum: 5, seqType: Double("10"), type: "Double" },
  { seqNum: 25, seqType: Double("10"), type: "Double"  },
  { seqNum: 6, seqType: String("10"), type: "String"  },
  { seqNum: 24, seqType: String("10"), type: "String" },
  { seqNum: 7, seqType: [ "1", "2", "3" ], type: "Array" },
  { seqNum: 23, seqType: [ "1", "2", "3" ], type: "Array" },
  { seqNum: 8, seqType: [ [1], [2], [3] ], type: "Array" },
  { seqNum: 22, seqType: [ [1], [2], [3] ], type: "Array " },
  { seqNum: 9, seqType: [ 1, 2, 3 ], type: "Array" },
  { seqNum: 21, seqType: [ 1, 2, 3 ], type: "Array" },
  { seqNum: 10, seqType: true, type: "Boolean" },
  { seqNum: 11, seqType: new Timestamp(), type: "Timestamp" },
  { seqNum: 12, seqType: new Date(), type: "Date" },
  { seqNum: 13, seqType: new ObjectId(), type: "ObjectId" },
] )
```

Create indexes on the sequence number ( `seqNum` ) and sequence type ( `seqType` ) fields:

```
db.keyTypes.createIndex( { seqNum: 1 } )
db.keyTypes.createIndex( { seqType: 1 } )
```

Query the collection using `find()`. The projection document, `{ _id: 0 }`, suppresses the `_id` field in the output display.

```
db.keyTypes.find( {}, { _id: 0 } )
```

The documents are returned in insertion order:

```
{ seqNum: 1, seqType: null, type: 'null' },
{ seqNum: 29, seqType: null, type: 'null' },
{ seqNum: 2, seqType: 10, type: 'Int32' },
{ seqNum: 28, seqType: 10, type: 'Int32' },
{ seqNum: 3, seqType: Long("10"), type: 'Long' },
{ seqNum: 27, seqType: Long("10"), type: 'Long' },
{ seqNum: 4, seqType: Decimal128("10"), type: 'Decimal128' },
// Output truncated
```

The sequence number ( `seqNum` ) index has values of the same type. Use the `seqNum` index to query the `keyTypes` collection:

```
db.keyTypes.find( {}, { _id: 0 } ).sort( { seqNum: 1} )
```

The seqNum keys are integers. The documents are returned in numerical order:

```
{ seqNum: 1, seqType: null, type: 'null' },
{ seqNum: 2, seqType: 10, type: 'Int32' },
{ seqNum: 3, seqType: Long("10"), type: 'Long' },
{ seqNum: 4, seqType: Decimal128("10"), type: 'Decimal128' },
{ seqNum: 5, seqType: 10, type: 'Double' },
{ seqNum: 6, seqType: '10', type: 'String' },
{ seqNum: 7, seqType: [ '1', '2', '3' ], type: 'Array' },
// Output truncated
```

The sequence type ( `seqType` ) index has values of the different types. Use the `seqType` index to query the `keyTypes` collection:

```
db.keyTypes.find( {}, { _id: 0 } ).sort( { seqType: 1} )
```

The documents are returned in **BSON type sort order**:

```
{ seqNum: 1, seqType: null, type: 'null' },
{ seqNum: 29, seqType: null, type: 'null' },
{ seqNum: 9, seqType: [ 1, 2, 3 ], type: 'Array' },
{ seqNum: 21, seqType: [ 1, 2, 3 ], type: 'Array' },
{ seqNum: 2, seqType: 10, type: 'Int32' },
{ seqNum: 28, seqType: 10, type: 'Int32' },
{ seqNum: 3, seqType: Long("10"), type: 'Long' },
{ seqNum: 27, seqType: Long("10"), type: 'Long' },
{ seqNum: 4, seqType: Decimal128("10"), type: 'Decimal128' },
{ seqNum: 26, seqType: Decimal128("10"), type: 'Decimal128' },
{ seqNum: 5, seqType: 10, type: 'Double' },
{ seqNum: 25, seqType: 10, type: 'Double' },
{ seqNum: 7, seqType: [ '1', '2', '3' ], type: 'Array' },
{ seqNum: 23, seqType: [ '1', '2', '3' ], type: 'Array' },
{ seqNum: 6, seqType: '10', type: 'String' },
{ seqNum: 24, seqType: '10', type: 'String' },
{ seqNum: 8, seqType: [ [ 1 ], [ 2 ], [ 3 ] ], type: 'Array' },
{ seqNum: 22, seqType: [ [ 1 ], [ 2 ], [ 3 ] ], type: 'Array ' },
{
  seqNum: 13,
  seqType: ObjectId("6239e3922604d5a7478df071"),
  type: 'ObjectId'
},
{ seqNum: 10, seqType: true, type: 'Boolean' },
{
  seqNum: 12,
  seqType: ISODate("2022-03-22T14:56:18.100Z"),
  type: 'Date'
},
{
  seqNum: 11,
  seqType: Timestamp({ t: 1647960978, i: 1 }),
  type: 'Timestamp'
}
```

In array comparisons:

-   A less-than comparison, or an ascending sort, compares the smallest elements of the array according to the **BSON type sort order**.
-   A greater-than comparison, or a descending sort, compares the largest elements of the array according to the **reverse BSON type sort order.**
-   When comparing a field whose value is a one element array (example, `[ 1 ]`) with non-array fields (example, `2`), the comparison is for `1` and `2`.
-   A comparison of an empty array (example, `[ ]`) considers the empty array as less than a null value or a missing field value.
-   Numerical types (`Int32`, `Long`, `Decimal128`, `Double`) are equivalent when compared with other types.
-   Within the **Numbers BSON type**, numerical types are sorted:
-   `Int32`
-   `Long`
-   `Decimal128`
-   `Double`

# Ensure Indexes Fit in RAM

For the fastest processing, ensure that your indexes fit entirely in RAM so that the system can avoid reading the index from disk.

To check the size of your indexes, use the `db.collection.totalIndexSize()` helper, which returns data in bytes:

```
> db.collection.totalIndexSize()
4617080000
```

The above example shows an index size of almost `4.3` gigabytes. To ensure this index fits in RAM, you must not only have more than that much RAM available but also must have RAM available for the rest of the working set. Also remember:

-   If you have and use multiple collections, you must consider the size of all indexes on all collections. The indexes and the working set must be able to fit in memory at the same time.

There are some limited cases where indexes do not need to fit in memory. See [Indexes that Hold Only Recent Values in RAM](#indexes-that-hold-only-recent-values-in-ram).

## Indexes that Hold Only Recent Values in RAM

Indexes do not have to fit entirely into RAM in all cases. If the value of the indexed field increments with every insert, and most queries select recently added documents; then MongoDB only needs to keep the parts of the index that hold the most recent or "right-most" values in RAM. This allows for efficient index use for read and write operations and minimize the amount of RAM required to support the index.
